---
title: Finally, a blog.
description: This article explains where this idea comes from and what I envision for its content.
date: 2023-09-06
---

## First article but why

A year ago, two friends told me to start writing. At first, it took me by surprise. Where does that come from? I sometimes wondered about having a blog, to start increasing my online presence. Yet, smarter people around me were already sharing good stuffs. Everything is already shared.

After a few months, they came back with a more explicit proposal: "start writing down your own heuristics!". From this discussion, following thoughts came up:

1. I don't have any heuristics.
2. I never take the time to materialize them.
3. I'm in the field since 10 years, I should have some.

First, for my own benefits, since I memorize much more by practicing. Second, it might be useful to some other folks out there. Will I only talk about tech? Not sure. Since it's for me a knowledge center, I guess I'd also share on various theme I'd be into.

On January 2nd 2023, I attended this [open space](https://virtualddd.com/sessions/85) organized by virtual-ddd. If you ever have the chance to attend any of them, I strongly recommend it. Among the different sessions I attended, one particularly led by [Diana Montalion](https://mastodon.social/@diana@hachyderm.io) inspired me to start writing with a pen on a notebook. Many participants shared their point of view on writing, maintaining a blog, or even simply on paper. This convinced me to invest time in this practice. I now take my notebook from time to time when I feel my brain actively thinking about too many things at once.

If ever you want to react to an article, I would happily discuss on social networks about it or through the [contact](/contact) form. I don't think this blog would ever have a comment section.
